In the middle of the path of life I found myself lost in a dark forest, the wrong path and walking, when the soul wandered asleep. Long to tell, what is not forgotten, how was that place of misfortune and is just remembering so much bitterness,
and the mind be terrified. That terrible, desolate place, that inhospitable, intricate place, that place of grief and distemplanza, that wandering aimlessly and meaninglessly,
and the more the steps, the more lost, only to death has compassion.
But when I reached the foot of a hill where the valley of horrors that I crossed at night, with a thousand terrors, ended and almost caused my ruin, I raised my eyes, saw the morning light in the hill. My fears ceased when I looked at the glows of the star that sent the beings. And I think that when I climb the hill, a panther that closes my way, and frightening, a haughty and strong haughty lion, and suddenly, a wolf, dry, wild. Skinny, voracious, anxious and miserable. And I lost hope of my luck.
Like the one who breathes, he has overcome the deadly danger that has struck him down, to see, unhappy, that he has fallen into a more cruel and ruthless one, so that I, an instant, calm, looked at that place from which the living soul has not left, I felt defeated
by horror, and dead, and devoured. When full of horror, I backed away, I saw a figure that seemed voiceless to me: such was the silence I felt. And at the point I shouted in my despair: Who are you, shadow or true man, come to my aid! Have mercy on me!
He replied: Man I am not, I have been. When Julio was born, although already late, with Augustus I lived, under the boast of false gods that today have died. Poet I went, and I sang the value fulfilled
of that son of Anchises that when the haughty llion burns, defeated not cowardly founds empire greater than the destroyed. And tell me, why are you in such sorrow and do not climb Mount Venture,
reason and cause of all joy?
And when he heard his voice, my soul became serene, despite the dark valley, because my heart knew him. So, are you Virgil? Luminar of the poets, noble source
of words, flow that precisely, by its greatness, will be called sea! How many hours I have put into studying your books, long and lovingly, for you, I was shown, wise eminent, my Master, the great Art and its rhyming. Look at the beast that is harassing me,
preventing my passage, his presence alone makes me tremble veins and pulse.
Look at the place that is dragging me, help me, before it, your prudence, because in me all impulse has stopped. It is convenient for you to take another path, he replied, that beast is so evil, bloodthirsty, perverse and ruthless, that it is to kill for killing, its folly.
Its natural is low and so petty that it is never satiated. Not finished devouring the prey and the stab of greater hunger burns his intestine. But the Mastiff will come in pain
He has to kill her, because he does not treasure gold or land, but peace. Love. He will throw it into the horrors of Hell, from where, at a bad time, it made her envy and resentment.
I will be your guide, that's why I thought that I will have to take you out of this place in another way, after a long journey through an eternal place not visited. You will hear the cry of the desperate forever and the song of the lineage that, humble in its torment, pays tribute to what to see is to be blessed.
And in the place that everything in Him consists, happy is the one to whom it leads, to be more worthy than me, to guide you. For that God you did not know, help me, Poet, as soon as I should!
And so I began to continue his walk.
